Tracy didn't go home that evening and resisted Riley's attacks. What does Tracy need to do before this? Find somewhere to go. Sydney walked past a homeless woman asking for change but did not have any money they could give to her. Sydney felt bad afterwards. How would you describe Sydney? sympathetic
Sasha protected the patients' rights by making new laws regarding cancer drug trials. What will patients want to do next? get petitions signed. Jordan was in charge of taking the food on the camping trip and left all the food at home. How would Jordan feel afterwards? horrible that he let his friends down on the camping trip
Kendall opened their mouth to speak and what came out shocked everyone. How would you describe Kendall? a very aggressive and talkative person Austin knew Quinn intimately and they slept together many times. Why did Austin do this? found QUinn attractive
Aubrey never told Riley the answer and Riley was angry. How would you describe Aubrey? rude Kendall's dog was overweight so they walked it five miles. Why did Kendall do this? start an exercise regimen. As usual, Aubrey went to the park but this morning, he met a stranger at the park who jogged with him. What will Others want to do next? have a nice jog
Jesse stood Cameron up instead of backing the person who was accusing him of stealing money. How would Cameron feel as a result? angry. Tem is very angry with Riley and says some pretty awful things. Riley looks at Jesse with hurt filled eyes.
Alex got food on the way home and hurried to arrive. What will Alex want to do next? go inside next. Remy met Riley's neighbors and they both had a big cup of tea with cookies. What will happen to Riley? loved
What emotion is Riley likely experiencing? Hurt and Sadness. Remy answered the question that was intended for someone else.How would someone else feel as a result? Bailey felt bad when she saw the homeless lady and gave her twenty dollars. How would you describe Bailey? thoughtful. 
Robin was too embarrassed to explain so she let Carson explain why it happened. What will happen to Carson? be confronted by someone. Kai sold their clothes to the bidder at an auction when they didn't fit. What will Kai want to do next? buy new clothes. Robin let Carson explain to their parents what had happened at school. What does Robin need to do before this? think Carson should explain. Austin just proved a way to predict cancer rates irrefutably. What will Others want to do next? Hire Austin for cancer research. Quinn climbed into bed because she had a bad headache. How would Quinn feel afterwards? relief
Jan thought it looked pretty dumb from the previews, but Jan actually enjoyed the movie. What will Jan want to do next? write a positive review. 
No matter how much Skylar practiced he was still bad at the game. How would Others feel as a result? Disgruntled
Quinn was making better money than they ever made before. Quinn had a new job that they loved. Why did Quinn do it? be accepted as an employee
